[TN] Load Testing (#350)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0032-load-testing.mdx

---
title: Load Testing
id: TN0032
tags: [testing, performance]
---

> When it comes to load testing a GraphQL API, the overall process is very similar to that of any other type of API. The majority of considerations will remain the same, regardless of the API specification used. However, there are certain distinctions specific to GraphQL and the Apollo ecosystem that are worth considering before conducting a load test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When it comes to load testing a GraphQL API, the overall process is very similar to that of any other type of API, and the majority of considerations will remain the same. However, there are certain distinctions specific to GraphQL and the Apollo ecosystem that are worth considering before conducting a load test.
```

> It's important to note that the purpose of this article is to bring attention to these unique considerations for load testing with GraphQL, rather than serving as a comprehensive guide on the setup and execution of load tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that the purpose of this article is to bring attention to these unique considerations for load testing with GraphQL, rather than serving as a comprehensive guide on the setup and execution of GraphQL load tests.
```

I might also retitle the article if this is the intent to just make it crystal clear.

## What to Load Test

When load testing a GraphQL API, there are two main ways to run the test:

-   Testing your entire deployed application stack
-   Testing each deployed service in isolation

Both approaches have their own benefits and tradeoffs. Testing services in isolation allows you to test the limits of each service independently and provides valuable data for making performance improvements for each independent service. However, it may not give insight into where to focus efforts to make the most impact on the end-user experience. Running a full stack test is better suited for finding these types of bottlenecks, but may offer little insight into the limits of other services.

We recommend focusing on testing services in isolation to maximize insight into not only current bottlenecks but also potential ones. This doesn't mean full stack tests should be avoided, as they have their place.

> ## Use Observability Tooling for Performance Insights

Reviewer 2: Could also mention the new `apollo_router_processing_time` router metric — very useful for understand how much work the router is doing vs waiting for subgraph responses.

> A load test is only as valuable as the information obtained after running it. Having the proper observability setup is crucial for a successful load test. When load testing a GraphQL API, you want metrics that are GraphQL-aware and provide insight into the runtime and execution behavior of production operations. [Apollo GraphOS' metrics engine](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/metrics/usage-reporting/) provides this deep insight into operations by allowing you to see things like slow operations and [field-level performance metrics](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/metrics/usage-reporting/#resolver-level-traces) on every operation. These metrics can also be grouped by field across different operations or broken down by the clients using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A load test is only as valuable as the information obtained after running it. Having the proper observability setup is crucial for a successful load test. When load testing a GraphQL API, you want metrics that are GraphQL-aware and provide insight into the runtime and execution behavior of production operations. [Apollo GraphOS' metrics engine](/graphos/metrics/usage-reporting/) provides this deep insight into operations by allowing you to see things like slow operations and [field-level performance metrics](/graphos/metrics/usage-reporting/#resolver-level-traces) on every operation. These metrics can also be grouped by field across different operations or broken down by the clients using them.
```

> Apollo also offers first-class support for sending metrics outside the Apollo ecosystem to any system that supports the [Open Telemetry](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/opentelemetry/) protocol (OLTP) and a built-in Datadog integration for enterprise customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apollo also offers first-class support for sending metrics outside Apollo Studio to any system that supports the [Open Telemetry](/federation/opentelemetry/) protocol (OTLP) as well as a built-in Datadog integration for enterprise customers.
```

## Don't Pollute Production Metrics

When load testing a graph in production, it's a good idea to exclude load test metrics from live production metrics. For metrics sent to GraphOS, consider sending load test traffic to a dedicated schema variant, i.e. `My-Graph@load-variant`. This will allow you to cleanly separate production metrics from load tests. 

> _consider excluding load test metrics from other parts of your system, as it applies._

> Another option is to create named operations that follow a naming convention that signals they are being used as part of a load test. Be sure to have the ability to segment this data from actual production traffic.

Reviewer: Should we recommend this at all? Not sure we should recommend anything other than "don't use prod".

Author: Yeah I wasn't sure about this, just threw it as it was an "idea", but i'll remove this section.

## Use a Realistic Load Pattern that Resembles Production Usage

> Load test results are most helpful if they closely match the patterns of production traffic. Take for example, a Graph that only has a set number of internal client applications. The applications have a pre-defined number of operations that hit production. It wouldn't make sense to generate 200,000 unique operations as part of a load test if the total number actual operations is several orders of magnitude less than that. It's important to simulate realistic patterns during load testing to ensure the results are relevant and useful for improving performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load test results are most helpful if they closely match the patterns of production traffic. Take a graph that only has a set number of internal client applications as an example. The applications have a pre-defined number of operations that hit production. It wouldn't make sense to generate 200,000 unique operations as part of a load test if the total number actual operations is several orders of magnitude less than that. It's important to simulate realistic patterns during load testing to ensure the results are relevant and useful for improving performance.
```

unsure about capitalization of `Graph` in this context.

In addition, consider testing for different scenarios such as peak usage, unexpected traffic spikes, and long-term usage patterns to ensure the GraphQL API can handle various types of load.

## Potential Bottlenecks

More than likely, your performance bottlenecks will be at the application level (resolvers and beyond), not in the Router or GraphQL execution engine.

> When we were starting our first load tests for the early alpha version of the Router, we had to create test suites to run against the Router and the Gateway. To fully reach the bottlenecks in the gateway using realistic load patterns, we had to remove almost all latency in the subgraphs. Saying nothing about the performance improvements in the static binary that is the Router, which is drastically more performant. For most real world setups, the time spent in the subgraph resolver code and the underlying data sources will be the bottleneck. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we were starting our first load tests for the early alpha version of the Router, we had to create test suites to run against the Router and the Gateway. To fully reach the bottlenecks in the gateway using realistic load patterns, we had to remove almost all latency in the subgraphs. For most real world setups, the time spent in the subgraph resolver code and the underlying data sources will be the bottleneck. 
```

unsure on how to better incorporate the removed line.

> > _If you are running the node.js Gateway and looking to boost performance, check out our Tech Note on [Improving Gateway Performance](technotes/TN0009-gateway-performance/)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> _If you are running the Node.js Gateway and looking to boost performance, check out our Tech Note on [Improving Gateway Performance](technotes/TN0009-gateway-performance/)_
```

The most likely scenario in which you'll see degraded performance at these layers is when the number of unique operations is high.

### Operation Cardinality

> When a GraphQL API encounters a new operation, the operation must be parsed into the proper format, validated against the existing schema, and then finally executed. The Router goes through the additional step of [query planning](federation/query-plans) as well. These steps can often account for some noticeable runtime overhead and latency if the volume of unique operations is high enough. 

Reviewer: It may be worth noting that variables do _not_ affect cardinality for planning/caching purposes, only requested fields/types.

All of these steps must happen for the initial request of every unique operation against your graph. 

> The good news is that most of these steps are highly cacheable, so subsequent calls can bypass most of those steps (all but the actual execution). Apollo has several built-in features that take advantage of this, like [Automatic Persisted Queries (APQs)](apollo-server/performance/apq/). APQ's are on by default in Apollo Server and just a simple configuration setting in Apollo Client to enable them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The good news is that most of these steps are highly cacheable, so subsequent calls can bypass most of those steps (all but the actual execution). Apollo has several built-in features that take advantage of this, such as [Automatic Persisted Queries (APQs)](apollo-server/performance/apq/). APQ's are on by default in Apollo Server/Gateway and the Apollo Router, and just a simple configuration setting in Apollo Client to enable them. 
```

Reviewer: One note- it may be worth calling out that your load testing infra will also need to either use Apollo Client or support APQs- otherwise unsure how useful this would be be for load testing purposes beyond showing max throughput.

The bad news is that a graph which processes a high cardinality of operations that are only executed once, can't take advantage of most of these features.

Again, this isn't a big concern in most real world applications as operations are normally executed more than once, and the cardinality of operations is hopefully much smaller than the total number of possible operation permutations for a given schema. 

> With non public GraphQL API's, simply implementing APQ's is often enough to mitigate this issue. This is due to the fact that tee number of operations hitting the production graph is finite and are typically called more than once during the lifecycle of a server deployment, resulting in more cache hits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With non public GraphQL API's, simply implementing APQ's is often enough to mitigate this issue as the number of operations hitting the production graph is finite and are typically called more than once during the lifecycle of a server deployment, resulting in more cache hits.
```

> While outside the scope of this article, mitigating this issue if it occurs for public APIs can be a bit more involved, but still possible though techniques like rate limiting and query costing. While it's helpful to be aware of these potential bottlenecks, know that in most cases this won't be an issue, and if they ever do become an issue, they can mostly be mitigated with existing, built in software provided by Apollo.

Reviewer: Unsure if this should be called out here to keep it concise and tied to load testing alone.

> ## Summary

Reviewer 2: The summary is unnecessary

> Load testing a GraphQL API is similar to load testing other types of APIs, with just a few unique considerations. By focusing on testing services in isolation, using observability tooling for performance insights, and using a realistic load pattern that resembles production usage, you can ensure a successful load test and gather actionable insight into your Graph's performance.

Reviewer: Unsure this is needed.
